#summary Compositions have a local version lifecycle

= Introduction =

When using third party libraries is is useful to have control, esp in a world of weakly defined dependencies as seen in maven central.

== Weak dependencies ==
They are weak because they don't use ranges. When you say i want version 2.4 in maven that means something like 2.4 if a project closer defines a version 3.2 then that wins.

{{{
A -> B -> C 
C -> D 2.4
A -> D 3.2
}}}

Because A's dependency on D is closer that D's it wins conflict resolution.

== Ranges ==
In my world 2.4 and 3.2 are not compatible, so I always use ranges.

{{{
A -> B -> C
C -> D [2,3)
A -> D [3,4)
}}}

This results in a conflict and maven will refuse to resolve the tree for A because 2 and 3 versions of D cannot exist together.

I use compositions to hold fixed ranges for third party projects and provide a new version lifecycle to use in closer projects.

For example 

{{{
sticky-composite-spring25-1.5 -> spring-context [2.5.6]
}}}

The square brackets define the range from 2.5.6 to 2.5.6 i.e. only that version is allowed. Now everything that needs spring25 depends on the composite.

== Non breaking upstream updates ==
If 2.5.7 comes out and testing shows its fully compatible then sticky-composite-spring25 can be released again
{{{
sticky-composite-spring25-1.6 -> spring-context [2.5.7]
}}}

Now of course all your projects used 
{{{
<dependency>
  <groupId>net.stickycode.composite</groupId>
  <artifactId>sticky-composite-spring25</artifactId>
  <version>[1,2)</version>
</dependency>
}}}
So as soon as the new spring25 composite is released your project picks it up.

== Breaking upstream updates ==

If 2.5.7 was found to break things then the major version of the composite-spring25 is released...
{{{
sticky-composite-spring25-2.1 -> spring-context [2.5.7]
}}}
And any projects that wanted to move up would need to change the range, this will of course conflict. It might be a hassle to change but at least you know that you are not accidentally mixing spring jars that are not compatible.
